the adoption

When Paul Jobs was mustered out of the Coast Guard after World
War II, he made a wager with his crewmates. They had arrived in San
Francisco, where their ship was decommissioned, and Paul bet that he
would find himself a wife within two weeks. He was a taut, tattooed
engine mechanic, six feet tall, with a passing resemblance to James
Dean. But it wasn't his looks that got him a date with Clara Hagopian,
a sweet-humored daughter of Armenian immigrants. It was the fact
that he and his friends had a car, unlike the group she had originally
planned to go out with that evening. Ten days later, in March 1946,
Paul got engaged to Clara and won his wager. It would turn out to be
a happy marriage, one that lasted until death parted them more than
forty years later.
Paul Reinhold Jobs had been raised on a dairy farm in Germantown, Wisconsin. Even though his father was an alcoholic and some
times abusive, Paul ended up with a gentle and calm disposition under
his leathery exterior. After dropping out of high school, he wandered
through the Midwest picking up work as a mechanic until, at age nineteen, he joined the Coast Guard, even though he didn't know how

to swim. He was deployed on the USS General M. C. Meigs and spent
much of the war ferrying troops to Italy for General Patton. His talent
as a machinist and fireman earned him commendations, but he occasionally 
found himself in minor trouble and never rose above the rank
of seaman.
Clara was born inNew Jersey, where her parents had landed after
fleeing the Turks in Armenia, and they moved to the Mission District
of SanFrancisco when she was a child. She had a secret that she rarely
mentioned to anyone: She had been married before, but her husband
had been killed in the war. So when she met Paul Jobs on that first
date, she was primed to start a new life.
Like many who lived through the war, they had experienced
enough excitement that, when it was over, they desired simply to settle
down, raise a family, and lead a less eventful life. They had little money,
so they moved to Wisconsin and lived with Paul's parents for a few
years, then headed for Indiana, where he got a job as a machinist for
International Harvester. His passion was tinkering with old cars, and
he made money in his spare time buying, restoring, and selling them.
Eventually, he quit his day job to become a full-time used car salesman.
Clara, however, loved San Francisco, and in 1952 she convinced
her husband to move back there. They got an apartment in the Sunset
District facing the Pacific, just south of Golden Gate Park, and he took
a job working for a finance company as a "repo man," picking the locks
of cars whose owners hadn't paid their loans and repossessing them.
He also bought, repaired, and sold some of the cars, making a decent
enough living in the process.
There was, however, something missing in their lives. They wanted
children, but Clara had suffered an ectopic pregnancy, in which the
fertilized egg was implanted in a fallopian tube rather than the uterus,
and she had been unable to have any. So by 1955, after nine years of
marriage, they were looking to adopt a child.
Like Paul Jobs, Joanne Schieble was from a rural Wisconsin family
of German heritage. Her father, Arthur Schieble, had immigrated to
the outskirts of Green Bay, where he and his wife owned a mink farm
and dabbled successfully in various other businesses, including real

estate and photoengraving. He was very strict, especially regarding his
daughter's relationships and he had strongly disapproved of her first
love, an artist who was not a Catholic. Thus it was no surprise that he
threatened to cut Joanne off completely when, as a graduate student at
the University of Wisconsin, she fell in love with Abdulfattah "John"
Jandali, a Muslim teaching assistant from Syria.
Jandali was the youngest of nine children in a prominent Syrian
family. His father owned oil refineries and multiple other businesses,
with large holdings in Damascus and Horns, and at one point pretty
much controlled the price of wheat in the region. His mother, he later
said, was a"traditional Muslim woman" who was a"conservative, obedient housewife." Like the Schieble family, the Jandalis put a premium
on education. Abdulfattah was sent to a Jesuit boarding school, even
though he was Muslim, and he got an undergraduate degree at the
American University in Beirut before entering the University of Wisconsin
to pursue a doctoral degree in political science.
In the summer of 1954, Joanne went with Abdulfattah to Syria.
They spent two months in Horns, where she learned from his family
to cook Syrian dishes. When they returned to Wisconsin she discovered that she was pregnant. They were both twenty-three, but they
decided not to get married. Her father was dying at the time, and he
had threatened to disown her if she wed Abdulfattah. Nor was abortion an easy option in a small Catholic community. So in early 1955,
Joanne traveled to SanFrancisco, where she was taken into the care of
a kindly doctor who sheltered unwed mothers, delivered their babies,
and quietly arranged closed adoptions.
Joanne had one requirement: Her child must be adopted by college
graduates. So the doctor arranged for the baby to be placed with a lawyer and his wife. But when a boy was born—on February 24,1955—
the designated couple decided that they wanted a girl and backed out.
Thus it was that the boy became the son not of a lawyer but a high
school dropout with a passion for mechanics and his salt-of-the-earth
wife who was working as a bookkeeper. Paul and Clara named their
new baby Steven Paul Jobs.
When Joanne found out that her baby had been placed with a couple who had not even graduated from high school, she refused to sign

the adoption papers. The standoff lasted weeks, even after the baby
had settled into the Jobs household. Eventually Joanne relented, with
the stipulation that the couple promise—indeed sign a pledge—to
fund a savings account to pay for the boy's college education.
There was another reason that Joanne was balky about signing
the adoption papers. Her father was about to die, and she planned to
marry Jandali soon after. She held out hope, she would later tell family
members, sometimes tearing up at the memory, that once they were
married, she could get their baby boy back.
Arthur Schieble died in August 1955, after the adoption was finalized. Just after Christmas that year, Joanne and Abdulfattah were
married in St. Philip the Apostle Catholic Church in Green Bay. He
got his PhD in international politics the next year, and then they had
another child, a girl named Mona. After she and Jandali divorced
in 1962, Joanne embarked on a dreamy and peripatetic life that her
daughter, who grew up to become the acclaimed novelist Mona Simp
son, would capture in her book Anywhere but Here. Because Steve's
adoption had been closed, it would be twenty years before they would
all find each other.
Steve Jobs knew from an early age that he was adopted; "My parents
were very open with me about that," he recalled. He had a vivid memory
of sitting on the lawn of his house, when he was six or seven years old,
telling the girl who lived across the street. "So does that mean your real
parents didn't want you?" the girl asked. "Lightning bolts went off in my
head," according to Jobs. "I remember running into the house, crying.
And my parents said, 'No, you have to understand.' They were very
serious and looked me straight in the eye. They said, 'We specifically
picked you out.' Both of my parents said that and repeated it slowly for
me. And they put an emphasis on every word in that sentence."
Abandoned. Chosen. Special. Those concepts became part of who
Jobs was and how he regarded himself. His closest friends think that
the knowledge that he was given up at birth left some scars. "I think his
desire for complete control of whatever he makes derives directly from
his personality and the fact that he was abandoned at birth," said one
longtime colleague, Del Yocam. "He wants to control his environment,



and he sees the product as an extension of himself." Greg Calhoun,
who became close to Jobs right after college, saw another effect. "Steve
talked to me a lot about being abandoned and the pain that caused,"
he said. "It made him independent. He followed the beat of a different
drummer, and that came from being in a different world than he was
born into."
Later in life, when he was the same age his biological father had
been when he abandoned him, Jobs would father and abandon a child
of his own. (He eventually took responsibility for her.) Chrisann Brennan, the mother of that child, said that being put up for adoption left
Jobs "full of broken glass," and it helps to explain some of his behavior.
 "He who is abandoned is an abandoner," she said. Andy Hertzfeld, who worked with Jobs at Apple in the early 1980s, is among the
few who remained close to both Brennan and Jobs. "The key question
about Steve is why he can't control himself at times from being so reflexively cruel and harmful to some people," he said. "That goes back to
being abandoned at birth. The real underlying problem was the theme
of abandonment in Steves life."
Jobs dismissed this. "There's some notion that because I was abandoned, I worked very hard so I could do well and make my parents
wish they had me back, or some such nonsense, but that's ridiculous,"
he insisted. "Knowing I was adopted may have made me feel more independent, but I have never felt abandoned. I've always felt special. My
parents made me feel special." He would later bristle whenever anyone
referred to Paul and Clara Jobs as his "adoptive" parents or implied that
they were not his "real" parents. "They were my parents 1,000%," he
said. When speaking about his biological parents, on the other hand,
he was curt: "They were my sperm and egg bank. That's not harsh, it's
just the way it was, a sperm bank thing, nothing more."

